The ending, with the death of Don Juan and the survival of Catalinon, is the culmination of the buildup from Catalinon’s bits throughout the story. During the initial arrival of the statue, we get many humorous comments from Catalinon as well as some foreshadowing of the desdichada that will befall Don Juan. For example, when the statue signals for everyone to leave, Catalinon warns, “Malo. Por Dios / no te quedes, porque hay muerto / que mata de un mojicón / un gigante / Saliós todos”(2572-2574). As usual, Don Juan ignores Catalinon’s warnings and decides to foolishly follow the directions of the statue. Even to the very end, not once does Don Juan listen to anything Catalinon says and this eventually leads to his death. Finally, after all of Don Juan’s confidence and arrogance, his sins catch up to him and he is killed by the stone statue. Catalinon, who is right next to him, reacts out of fear: “No hay quien se escape, / que aquí tengo de morir / también por acompañarte”(2962-2963). Catalinon believes he will die as well, because he followed Don Juan during his sins. However, before sinking into the ground the statue says: “Esta es justicia de Dios, / quien tal hace, que tal pague”(2964-2965), leaving Catalinon alive. Catalinon never did anything, and therefore he does not have to pay the same price as Don Juan. The survival of Catalinon is a crucial part of the story that contributes to the moral. Catalinon, who never agreed with Don Juan’s tricks and always worried about the consequences of Don Juans sins, is left to tell the tale at the end. We are left with the coward, the character who constantly reminds us of the consequences of Don Juan’s actions and the poor quality of his character. Just as Catalinon tells us throughout the story, Don Juan’s sins come back to pay him in death. Catalinon echoes this sentiment as he tells the story of el burlador to the rest of the characters and repeats the stone statue’s final words: “Quien tal hace, que tal pague”(3053)
