In the next exchange between Don Juan and Catalinón, we get more foreshadowing of these consequences and more emphasis of “Que largo me lo fiáis” versus “quien tal hace, que tal pague”. Catalinón inquires about Don Juan’s next trick and warns:  “No lo apruebo. / Tú pretendes que escapemos / una vez, señor, burlados, / que el que vive de burlar, / burlado habrá de quedar / pagando tantos pecados / de una vez”(1434-1439). Catalinón can tell that Don Juan is getting more cocky and egotistical with each additional woman he seduces, and reminds him once again that his sins will pay him back all at once. Don Juan responds by mockingly calling him a preacher and coward, and declaring “El que se pone a servir / voluntad no ha de tener, / y todo ha de ser hacer, / y nada ha de ser decir. / Sirviendo, jugando estás, / y si quieres ganar luego, / haz siempre, porque en el juego, / quien más hace, gana más”(1444-1451). Don Juan’s point is that Catalinón should not say anything, only do whatever thing Don Juan orders him. He makes an analogy to a game, saying that whoever does more will win more. Catalinón responds “Y también quien hace, y dice, / topa, y pierde en cualquier parte”(1542-1543), basically saying that there is someone who loses in these games as well. This back and forth dialogue further develops the ideological differences between Don Juan el burlador y Catalinón el cobarde. We can see the core of these differences in the way that both characters talk about the analogy of a “game”: Don Juan’s philosophy is that you must act and do to “win”, while Catalinón thinks that playing the game creates the potential to “lose”. The conversation is finished by Catalinón submitting to Don Juan: “digo que de aquí adelante / lo que me mandas haré, / y a tu lado forzare”(1456-1459)”, again emphasizing the master-servant dynamic between the two. Of course, Catalinón is not meant to oppose Don Juan in his actions so this is an expected response. He is only there to raise questions about Don Juan’s actions to the audience. It is interesting to note that Catalinón specifically says he will do whatever Don Juan wants, but does not say anything about stopping his complaints. Entonces, nothing has really changed significantly after this conversation because Catalinón has always done what Don Juan asks. This exchange is not meant to change anything in the plot or the way that the two characters interact, but instead to make it clear to the audience what their relationship looks like and reaffirm the differences in their beliefs and characters. These differences in their philosophy are finally brought to the test as the story closes, with the arrival of the stone statue.
