We first see Catalinón’s opposition to Don Juan after he speaks of his plan to seduce Tisbea and orders Catalinón to prepare the horses. Catalinón warns that “Los que fingís y engañáis / las mujeres de esa suerte / lo pagaréis en la muerte”(992- 994). This is a warning that for all his tricks and games, Don Juan will have to suffer the consequences in death from the women that he cheats . It is foreshadowing that encourages the audience to consider the problems with Don Juan’s behavior. Don Juan responds with his classic phrase, “¡Que largo me lo fiáis!”(995), an expression that declares the belief that there is an enormous amount of time before his death when he has to deal with the consequences, which by then will be small and irrelevant. He also calls Catalinón a coward, saying that the name “Catalinón” is fitting (996-997). This exchange establishes the battle of ideologies that takes place during the story, between the careless nature of Don Juan and the cowardice of Catalinón. Don Juan enjoys the sins, while Catalinón fears the punishments. In other words, a battle between “Que largo me lo fiáis” and “quien tal hace, que tal pague” (said by the statue and Catalinón at the end). Catalinón reinforces his beliefs in his response, asserting that “Tus pareceres sigue, que en burlar mujeres / quiero ser Catalinón”(997-998). It is important to note that Catalinón is clearly not stopping Don Juan, because he says “Tus pareceres sigue”. Instead, Catalinón is saying that he will continue to be a coward and disagree with Don Juan’s actions. This is emphasized by Don Juan’s response, “Vete, y las yeguas prevén”(1001), an order to continue on with Don Juan’s plan. Of course, Catalinón obeys because he is not stopping Don Juan, only disagreeing and worrying about the consequences. This dynamic is only possible between Don Juan and Catalinón, because as a servant Catalinón holds no power over Don Juan and cannot force him to take any action. At the same time, Don Juan never takes Catalinón seriously, which allows Catalinón to continue to voice his disagreements with minimal consequences as the story continues. Por eso, he doesn’t respond to Catalinón’s last words in the conversation and only tells him “Vete”. In fact, Don Juan hardly listens to Catalinón and never changes his opinions based on what Catalinón says. Pues, we might ask, what is the point of Catalinón and these things he is saying? The answer is that it is all for the audience. Catalinón’s opposition to Don Juan is not there to alter the plot, but to present a different view to the audience. He is only there as an interlocutor to raise questions about Don Juan's actions.When Catalinón talks about the consequences of Don Juan’s actions, the audience, not Don Juan, is listening. This idea is especially clear in the next scenes with Catalinón, where his remarks are directed to the audience.
